---
title: Appendix A. Additional Resources
permalink: /a-resources/
---

# Appendix A. Additional Resources

Congratulations! You’ve finished the course! Or, perhaps, you’re eager to see
the mountain of information that went into generating this course. Either way,
here is a list of different objects that helped me immensely. In each
category, they are listed more or less in descending order of importance.

## Books

* Haverbeke, Marijn. [*Eloquent JavaScript*](http://eloquentjavascript.net).
2nd Ed. San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2015. The companion book for this
course. Enough detail about JavaScript for a future computer scientist but
also remembering that novices are reading the book.

* Crockford, Douglas. [*JavaScript: The Good
Parts*](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/9780596517748.do). Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly Media, 2008. Showing its age, but a slender volume full of advice
worth following. Crockford has made a career of convincing programmers to take
JavaScript seriously, and this book is part of that process.

* Brown, Todd. [*Learning
JavaScript*](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920035534.do). 3rd Ed.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2016. The first book on this list to tackle
ES6 as a central part of its body. 

## Websites

* Haverbeke, Marijn. [*Eloquent JavaScript*](http://eloquentjavascript.net). The website for the
book.

* “[A Re-Introduction to
JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/A_re-introduction_to_JavaScript)”.
A concise refresher on JavaScript that also acts as a handy reference.

Elliott, Eric. “[Master the JavaScript Interview: What Is Functional
Programming?](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/master-the-javascript-interview-what-is-functional-programming-7f218c68b3a0).”
Far beyond the goals of this course, but a tantalizing look at a future for
JavaScript.

## Videos

* Crockford, Douglas. “[The Early
Years](https://www.youtube.com/embed/JxAXlJEmNMg).” *Crockford on JavaScript*.
2010.  Crockford takes us on a walk through the history of computer
programming up to the birth of JavaScript. In a talk that often veers to the
far too technical for our audience, he nevertheless drives two important
insights home: that programmers, the very people who would benefit most from
innovation, are often those least receptive to it, and that obsolete
technologies fade away slowly, making innovation difficult.

* Crockford, Douglas. “[And Then There Was
JavaScript](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RO1Wnu-xKoY).” *Crockford on
JavaScript*. 2010. Crockford continues the history, moving now through the
first, wild years of JavaScript.

* Burke, James. “[Faith in
Numbers](http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3dvbkg).” *Connections*. 1978. In
his classic, causal way, Burke draws a line from Roman-era water wheels to
computer programming, the prehistory to Crockford’s lectures.

## Software

* [Atom](http://atom.io).

* [Git](https://git-scm.com/).

* [Leaflet](http://leafletjs.com). A JavaScript map maker.

* [JQuery](http://jquery.com). A JavaScript library to simplify writing
JavaScript for the browser.

* [Bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com).

* Brave

* [Vim](http://www.vim.org). Despite this course’s dependence on Atom, the
actual course was written with vim. Originally released 25 years ago, vim is a
text editor that requires enormous patience at first. In my opinion, the steep
learning curve is worth it for many reasons, but I begrudge no one who looks
at it and shakes their head in disbelief.  

## Other Languages

### HTML

### Ruby

* [RubyMonk](https://www.rubymonk.com). An online tutorial to Ruby that forces
you to write your own code before moving to the next step. Because you are
writing live Ruby, mistakes raise exceptions and give useful error messages.

### Python

### R

